.TH romp 1
.SH NAME
romp \- translate a Murphi model to C++ for model checking via parallel random walks.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B \fB romp\fR \fB[options]\fR [\fB--output\fR \fI OUT_FILE\fR] [\fI IN_FILE\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB romp \fR is a parallel Murphi based model checker generator,
meant for large models that other murphi model checkers can't handle.
The generated model checker utilizes random walks rather than a BFS or DFS, 
and implements no state hashing.
Therefore the \fB romp\fR model checker is blind as to when to stop,
and a number of configurable options are available in the model checker to 
determine when to end end a ``romp''/random-walk.
.PP
PLEASE NOTE: this generates a C++ based model checker not a C based model checker,
so ensure that you use a C++ compiler when building the model checker.
Additionally, while \fB romp\fR requires a unix based system to be built,
the model checker only uses the C++ stdlib 
\fI (no direct use of OS libs, just use your preferred -pthread flag alternative)\fR
so you \fI theoretically \fR could build it on any OS (untested).
.PP
See
.BR rumur(1)
for more information about \fB rumur \fR or Murphi.
.PP
See the \fB FEATURE SUPPORT \fR section below for information about
what murphi and \fB rumur\fR features \fB romp\fR does and does not support.
.SH ARGUMENTS
\fBIN_FILE\fR
.RS
A File Path/Name of the Murphi model you wish to generate a model for.
.\" If none provided it can read from STDIN.
.RE
.SH OPTIONS
\fB --help\fR or \fB -h \fR
.RS
Display this help page.
.RE
.PP
\fB--output\fR \fI FILE\fR or \fB-o\fR \fI FILE\fR
.RS
Set path to write the generated C++ code to. 
Without this option, code is written to \fI<IN_FILE>.romp.cpp\fR.
.RE
.PP
\fB--rule-history-len\fR \fI NUM\fR or \fB-r\fR \fI NUM\fR
.RS
Set the size of the rule history that is displayed in a per walk report,
and is kept in a walker's buffer.
Useful for getting more info about what a walk has done, 
without using trace files.
Increases the size of a random walker's memory footprint by 8bytes 
per entry.
Without this option, the size of the history buffer defaults to 4.
\fINUM\fR must be a positive integer.
.RS
\fB NOTE:\fR the BFS objects always keep twice as much history as this number.
.RE
.RE
.PP
\fB--selection-algo=<int>\fR or \fB-s<int>\fR
.RS
Choose the rule selection algorithm to use options below:
.RE
.RS
\fB--selection-algo=0\fR or \fB-s0\fR: 100% random everything
.RS
\fB(1)\fR At every step CHOOSE a random rule.
\fB(2)\fR CHOOSE the ruleset params at random.
\fB(3)\fR CHECK the guard \fBif\fR it returns \fItrue\fR \fBthen\fR GOTO step 4 \fBelse\fR RETURN to step 1 for next simulation step
\fB(4)\fR APPLY the rule
\fB(5)\fR CHECK the global properties
\fB(6)\fR RETURN to step 1 for the next simulation step
.RE
.RE
.RS
\fB--selection-algo=1\fR or \fB-s1\fR: \fI[DEFAULT]\fR Random Ruleset params without replacement
.RS
\fB(1)\fR CREATE a \fI"bag"\fR of all of the rules (not specifying ruleset params)
\fB(2)\fR CHOOSE a rule at random from the bag of rules (\fBif\fR rule "bag" empty \fBthen\fR end walk early \fI-deadlock-\fR)
\fB(3)\fR CREATE a \fI"bag"\fR of all possible ruleset param combinations possible 
\fB(4)\fR CHOOSE a set of ruleset params from the params \fI"bag"\fR at random (\fBif\fR params bag empty, but params to fill RETURN to step 2)
\fB(5)\fR CHECK the guard, \fBif\fR it returns true \fBthen\fR GOTO step 6, \fBelse\fR RETURN to step 4 for the next simulation step.
\fB(6)\fR APPLY the rule
\fB(7)\fR CHECK the global properties (if any fail end the walk)
\fB(8)\fR RETURN to step 1 for the next simulation step.
.RE
.RE
.RS
\fB--selection-algo=2\fR or \fB-s2\fR: Random everything without replacement until successful
.RS
\fB(1)\fR CREATE a \fI"bag"\fR of all rules with all of their ruleset param options
\fB(2)\fR CHOOSE a rule with its ruleset param(s) from the \fI"bag"\fR at random (\fBif\fR bag empty, \fBthen\fR end walk early \fI-deadlock-\fR)
\fB(3)\fR CHECK the guard, \fBif\fR it returns true \fBthen\fR GOTO step 4, \fBelse\fR RETURN to step 2 for the next simulation step.
\fB(4)\fR APPLY the rule
\fB(5)\fR CHECK the global properties (if any fail end the walk)
\fB(6)\fR RETURN to step 1 for the next simulation step.
.RE
.RE
.\" .RS
.\" \fB--selection-algo=3\fR or \fB-s3\fR: Random everything without replacment until rule covarage
.\" .RS
.\" \fB(1)\fR construct a \fI"bag"\fR of all rules with all of their ruleset param options
.\" \fB(2)\fR choose a ruleset param from the \fI"bag"\fR at random (\fBif\fR the bag is empty \fBthen\fR goto step 1)
.\" \fB(3)\fR check the guard, \fBif\fR it returns true \fBthen\fR goto step 4, \fBelse\fR return to step 2 for the next simulation step.
.\" \fB(4)\fR apply the rule then check the global properties and return to step 2 for the next simulation step.
.\" .RE
.\" .RE
.RS
\fB--selection-algo=3\fR or \fB-s3\fR: Heuristic Symmetry Reduction 
.RS
\fB(1)\fR At every step CHOOSE a random rule
\fB(2)\fR CHOOSE it's ruleset parameters by the using next combination in lexicographic order.
\fB(3)\fR CHECK the guard \fBif\fR it returns true \fBthen\fR GOTO step 4 \fBelse\fR GOTO step 5.
\fB(4)\fR APPLY the rule
\fB(5)\fR CHECK the global properties (if any fail end the walk)
\fB(6)\fR regardless of the results of step 3 RETURN to step 1 for the next simulation step.
.RE
.RE
.PP
\fB--enable-assume\fR or \fB-a\fR
.RS
Enable support for \fB rumur's\fR \fI assume\fR property.
This will allow you to specify in your model when a state is invalid,
but is not in error.
When reached and it's conditional evaluates to true, that walk will
stop, but unless specified in the options of the generated model checker,
this violation will not be reported.
.RS
\fI aka\fR this is just like \fIInvariant/Assert\fR but it 
suppresses report of the violation by default.
.RE
.RE
.PP
\fB--enable-cover\fR or \fB-c\fR
.RS
Enable support for \fB rumur's\fR \fI cover\fR property.
This will allow you to specify that the model has been checked enough,
if a random walk has reached all \fI cover\fR statements have been reached,
and their conditional evaluated to true
\fIN\fR times, where \fIN\fR can be specified in the options of the
generated model checker.
.RS
.BR NOTE:
this feature needs to be enabled for each run of the model checker 
you wish to use it in, as this option just tells the \fB romp\fR tool
to generate a model checker with this capability.
.RE
.RE
.PP
\fB--enable-liveness\fR or \fB-l\fR
.RS
Enable support for \fB rumur's\fR \fI liveness\fR property.
This will allow you to specify that the model might be in a deadlock or
stuck in a loop
if a random walk has applied \fIN\fR rules without 
\fI liveness\fR property rules' conditional evaluating to true.
Where \fIN\fR can be specified in the options of the
generated model checker.
.RS
.BR NOTE:
this feature needs to be enabled for each run of the model checker 
you wish to use it in, as this option just tells the \fB romp\fR tool
to generate a model checker with this capability.
.RE
.RE
.PP
\fB--ignore-romp-props\fR or \fB-i\fR
.RS
suppress generation errors about the existence of unsupported rumur properties
in the model, when the appropriate enable options are not provided.
.RE
.PP
\fB--range-type=<C-type>\fR or \fB-R<C-type>\fR
.RS
Change the C/C++ type used to represent range values in the emitted code. 
By default, \fI int\fR is used. 
\fB romp\fR does not validate that the type you specify
is a valid C/C++ type, 
but simply trusts that you have given something that will be
available when you compile the generated code.
.RE
.PP
\fB--scalar-type=<C-type>\fR
.RS
\fI(!! Not currently implemented !!)\fR
Change the C/C++ type used to represent scalar & enum values in the emitted code. 
By default, \fI unsigned int\fR is used. 
\fB romp\fR does not validate that the type you specify
is a valid C/C++ type, 
but simply trusts that you have given something that will be
available when you compile the generated code.
.RE
.PP
\fB--version\fR or \fB-v\fR
.RS
Display version information and exit.
.RE
.PP
\fB--do-measure\fR or \fB-m\fR
.RS
Enable time measurements and other mildly useful stats 
in all reports and traces generated by the model checker.
.RS
.BR NOTE:
this can cause noticeable slowdowns as it often requires 
unnecessary system calls.
Additionally all time measurements are only given in seconds to the nearest
second, so short random-walks often result in reported 0s times.
.RE
.RE
.PP
\fB--simple-trace\fR or \fB-S\fR
.RS
This will reduce the size of rule and state representations in the trace files,
no data about the trace is removed, but it is not supported in
any (future) trace viewing utilities.
It can also help reduce the additional memory and time overhead for 
producing a trace.
.RS
.BR NOTE:
if the size of trace files are too large it is recommended to instead 
either reduce the max depth and increase the number of walks performed,
or if your model needs deep walks 
just only have the model checker generate traces for single walks
that you have identified as notable in a normal parallel launch.
.RE
.RE
.PP
\fB--default-walk-multiplier=<uint>\fR or \fB-w<uint>\fR
.RS
This will change the default multiplier used to determine how many walks are performed bassed upon 
the number of threads available on the device running the model.
You can manualy set the number of walks from the model checker for each run,
but sometimes it's nice to set a default multiplier bassed upon your models needs,
so you don't have to add another flag to a run of a generated model checker.
\fI[DEFAULT: 64]\fR
.RE
.PP
\fB--default-bfs-coefficient=<uint>\fR or \fB-b<uint>\fR
.RS
This will change the default coefficient used to determine how many unique states
the initial BFS will gernate (when enabled) before launching the random walkers with them. 
You can manualy set this number from the model checker for each run,
but sometimes it's nice to set a default coefficient bassed upon your models needs,
so you don't have to add another flag to a run of a generated model checker.
\fI[DEFAULT: 16]\fR
.RE
.PP
.PP
.SH FEATURE SUPPORT
\fBMurphi Types\fR
.RS
\fB romp \fR unlike  \fB rumur \fR does support \fB cmurphi's\fR 
\fI scalarsetunion \fR and \fI multiset \fR types.
However, the Choose "ruleset", and the plain MultisetRemove util for multisets 
is not fully implemented at this time.
(the latter is because it depends on the choose rule to work with any assured validity) 
These features might be be added in the future though.
.PP
\fB romp \fR huristically supports \fB rumur's\fR special properties, see section below for more details.
.PP
\fB romp \fR like \fB rumur \fR does not support \fB cmurphi's\fR
\fI real\fR datatypes, or any of the probibalistic rule anotations.
Further more we have no intenetion of adding support for these features 
at any later date.
.RE
.PP
\fB Approximate Symmetry Reduction\fR
.RS
The \fB romp \fR model checker implements a \fI approximate\fR symmetry reduction,
by always performing the rule variants generated by RuleSets in 
lexicographic order.
So while any rule can be still be chosen in any order, 
the values of all of the quantifiers in the \fI RulSet\fR structures a
\fI Rule\fR is nested inside of will always \fBtry\fR to be applied in 
lexicographic order.
If a \fIRule\fR's guard fails to be applied it will still progress
through the various 
.RE
.PP
\fB Approximate Deadlock Detection\fR
.RS
The model checker only implements a \fI heuristic/approximate\fR 
deadlock protection, in the form(s) of max depth, 
attempt limits (number of times randomly chosen rules can fail 
their guard checks in a row before terminating the random walk),
and other limits imposed by enabling the rumur \fI liveness\fR property
in generation AND when running the generated model checker.
.RE
.PP
\fB rumur Properties\fR
.RS
\fB romp \fR is built upon rumur's excellent murphi parsing library, 
and therefore has limited optional \fI (heuristic) \fR support for 
\fB rumur's \fR special property types \fI(assume, cover & liveness).\fR
To use them you must use the appropriate flag when generating your model checker 
using the \fB romp \fR tool.
See the \fB OPTIONS \fR section above for more info on each supported property.
.RE
.PP
\fB Function Side-Effect Protection\fR
.RS
We do not allow you to build a model checker that calls a Murphi Function with 
side effects (\fIi.e.\fR modifies a value in the state) inside a Rule's guard expr,
or a Property Rule's conditional expr.
This is for consistancy and safty in your model.
However, this is enfourced by C++ and your compiler so you will not recive an error about this 
from the \fB romp\fR tool, but rather your C/C++ compiler, if supported.
.RE
.PP
.SH SEE ALSO
rumur(1)
.SH AUTHOR
All comments, questions and complaints should be directed to the 
civic-fv research group at the University of Utah.
.PP
See <https://civic-fv.github.io/software/romp> for more details on
the current maintainer(s)
.SH LICENSE
This is free and unencumbered software released into the public domain.
.PP
Anyone is free to copy, modify, publish, use, compile, sell, or
distribute this software, either in source code form or as a compiled
binary, for any purpose, commercial or non-commercial, and by any
means.
.PP
In jurisdictions that recognize copyright laws, the author or authors
of this software dedicate any and all copyright interest in the
software to the public domain. We make this dedication for the benefit
of the public at large and to the detriment of our heirs and
successors. We intend this dedication to be an overt act of
relinquishment in perpetuity of all present and future rights to this
software under copyright law.
.PP
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
.PP
For more information, please refer to <http://unlicense.org>
